Examining the Current U.S.-South Africa Bilateral Relationship - Committee on Foreign Affairs (house.gov)
[00:09:59.700] - Speaker 
Good afternoon.

[00:10:00.170] - Congressman John James
Noon, the Committee on Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Africa will come to order. The purpose of this hearing is to examine the current status of the United States South Africa bilateral relationship. I now recognize myself for an opening statement. I am quite proud of the United States and South Africa's cordial relations. For nearly my entire life. South Africa has been United States largest trading partner in Africa since 2014, is home to hundreds of American businesses, and the value of our two way trade has reached 21 billion in 2021. However, it's becoming clear that the African National Congress of Today is no longer the party of Nelson Mandela. While the South African story is one of hope, reconciliation and determination, the ANC today is motivated by perpetuating a system of elite capture built on corruption and increasing government dependence through its national democratic revolution and while clearly deepening relations with the Chinese Communist Party and Putin's Russia. As a black man, I carry the knowledge of my own country's historical burden of inequality. And as a conservative black man, I understand that hard work perseverance and getting a shot pays off. That is clearly not the case in South Africa's ruling party, where, nearly 30 years into ANC rule, the South African people are more dependent than ever on a state that fails to consistently provide even the most basic services and provides bad policy.

[00:11:33.040] - Congressman John James
Take the example of black economic empowerment, a policy intended to support historically disadvantaged black citizens by providing increased access to the economy, but one that has repeatedly been undermined by corruption and nepotism from the ANC elites who have manipulated the scheme for personal gain at the expense of the broader black populace. The ANC elite are focused on increasing dependence on the state in order to exert control. Recently, it was publicly stated that there are now 18 million South Africans receiving state grants, compared to just 2.5 million in 1999. Much of this going to provide basic needs at the failure of states who generate meaningful and sustained employment that can only come with a healthy, growing private sector. Another disastrous policy is the ANC's land reform effort to enforce expropriation without compensation and destroy South Africa's constitutionally protected private property rights. The ANC claims that land reform and EWC are widely popular, but their own surveys show that only 2% of black South Africans identify land reform as a serious unresolved problem, while 80% prioritize economic growth and more jobs over land expropriation. Despite this, the ANC is currently pushing the Expropriation Bill and Land Court bill through Parliament to reward themselves for a job poorly done.

[00:12:55.000] - Congressman John James
There is no country in the world that has remained democratic after removing its population's private property rights, and I remain concerned about the ANC's democratic drift away from constitutional rule, especially in light of the Electoral Amendment Act being signed into law in April. Legislation this legislation undermines the fundamental democratic principle of proportional representation, counting independent votes as votes for the majority, the A and C is not a step toward constitutional rule. It's a further step away from democracy. In February, I introduced a House Resolution 145, which criticized specific aspects of the ANC's growing relationship with the Chinese Communist Party and Russia. Specifically, it highlighted South Africa's hosting of military exercises with Russia and China on the anniversary of Russia's further invasion of Ukraine and the fact that South Africa has abstained on multiple United Nations votes condemning Russia's invasion an invasion that an official ANC policy blames on the United States and attributes to NATO's eastward expansion. This, while the ANC accepted roughly 826,000 from a firm directly linked to the sanctioned Russian billionaire Victor Wexelberg. More recently, the ANC hosted the BRICS Conference in Johannesburg and has actively involved itself in Moscow Beijing's effort to de dollarize the global monetary system and rewrite international norms.

[00:14:20.650] - Congressman John James
Simply put, I believe these actions are inconsistent with South Africa's proud tradition of non alignment, and it should not go unaddressed in our relationship. In conclusion, in her meeting with Secretary Blinken yesterday, foreign Minister Pandora described the United States as one of the most important partners for South Africa. The United States has provided over 8 billion in bilateral aid to South Africa in the past 20 years, much of this through PEPFAR, an incredible bipartisan effort that has roughly halved South Africa's national HIV and AIDS mortality rate. The United States is South Africa's second largest trading partner and 21% of South Africa's exports to the US. Enjoy non reciprocal duty free trade status. I've said before, and I will say again, south Africa has a choice in what partners to prioritize, but so, too, does the United States. I believe it entirely appropriate to scrutinize the conduct of our important partner when the risks compromising our strong, dynamic bilateral relationship are at hand. In closing, it's my belief that South Africa is currently at an inflection point, and I view the next several months as critical in demonstrating whether it will put our important partnership back on track.

[00:15:42.720] - Congressman John James
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member, the Congresswoman from California, ms. Jacobs, for any statements you may have.

[00:15:48.150] – Congresswoman Sara Jacobs
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and all the witnesses for testifying before this subcommittee today on the current US. South Africa. Bilateral relationship. I think it's important to remember that our relationship with South Africa doesn't exist in a vacuum. It's built on decades of complicated history that at times has been self serving and short sighted. So we can't talk about today's relationship with South Africa without recognizing our history and understanding how it impacts our present and our future. The story of our relationship with South Africa is familiar to many African countries. During the Cold War. Too often the US. Supported and propped up authoritarian regimes in exchange for fleeting geostrategic alignment. In the long term, these decisions have fomented resentment against the US. And the regimes we supported, often undermining our long term interests in the 1980s, the United States supported the apartheid regime in South Africa largely because it took on anticommunist efforts in the region and was aligned with the United States. During the Cold War, the Reagan administration demonized opponents of apartheid, namely the African National Congress, as dangerous and communist, even designating the ANC as a terrorist organization. Meanwhile, the Soviet Union supported the ANC in their liberation efforts.

[00:17:05.160] - Congresswoman Sara Jacobs
50 years later, we're still feeling the legacy of these relationships. South Africa's majority party, the ANC, is more aligned with Russia instead of the United States. And thankfully, since then, we've made significant progress in the bilateral relationship and are now a strong friend and partner of the South African people, as demonstrated by our strong trade relationship through AGOA significant gains we made in health with our PEPFAR programs and the over 600 US. Companies in the country. But at the same time, we still see some justified lingering resentment. That's why, in this new age of strategic competition, we need to keep this history and these lessons in mind, lest we make the same mistakes again. The Biden administration understands this, as their strategy towards sub Saharan Africa makes it clear that the US. Seeks partnership with African countries, and we won't force countries to choose between the PRC or Russia and the United States. African countries don't want to be forced to choose, as they had to do during the Cold War, and frankly, it's not in the US's interest to do so, because we may not like the outcome. We know there are very real challenges between our two countries, and we shouldn't ignore them or brush them aside.

[00:18:16.240] - Congresswoman Sara Jacobs
But real partnership means being honest and clear about these challenges and working through them together, like the endemic corruption within the government, particularly since former President Zuma's administration and within the ANC itself. And when the lady R-A-U-S. Sanctioned Russian ship recently docked near Cape town and allegedly transported weapons to Russia, we were very clear that this was a violation of U. S. Sanctions. But we also can't let these challenges get in the way of the many opportunities that our bilateral relationship creates. So we need to find productive ways to continue engaging with the South African people on issues of mutual interest, whether that is economic growth, addressing the energy crisis, good governance, or building a just and representative global governance system. And we need to make sure that our policy towards the South African government don't have negative impacts on our relationship with the South African people. So I'm looking forward to hearing from experts here today on their perspectives and recommendations on how U. S. Policymakers should address the opportunities and challenges in the US. Relationship with South Africa. I yield back.

[00:19:19.300] - Congressman John James
Thank you, Ms. Jacobs. Other members of the committee are reminded that opening statements may be submitted for the record. We are pleased to have distinguished panel of witnesses before us today. Mr. Anthony Carroll is an adjunct professor at Johns Hopkins University School of Advanced International Studies. Riddy Tahabi is a senior South African journalist, broadcaster, and moderator. Chris Marling is the international Chief Executive Officer at SADC executive Director of Good Governance in Africa. Thank you for being here today. Your full statements will be made part of the record, and I'll ask each of you to keep your spoken remarks to about five minutes in order to allow time for me for questions. I now recognize Mr. Carroll for his opening statement.

[00:20:03.620] - Anthony Carroll, Johns Hopkins University, School of Advanced International Studies
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. South Africa can be viewed as a glass that is both half empty and half full. South Africa is Africa's most advanced economy, offering sophisticated capital markets, financial institutions, and professional services. South Africa's leading research universities collaborate with U. S. Counterparts in myriad areas. South African companies such as MTN, Shoprite, Standard Bank, APSA, and Aspen Pharmaceutical have become omnipresent in Africa. The courts in South Africa are professional and independent. South Africa's media is open, independent, and outspoken. Its Reserve Bank is independent of government and operates in accordance with global monetary standards, and its Department of treasury does its best to monitor fiscal policies. As a result, the Rand is the most stable and convertible currency in Africa. The Southern African Customs Union includes South Africa's four neighboring countries, ensuring duty free access across borders and providing a revenue sharing formula. From a civil liberty standpoint, there are no constraints on free speech or exercise of religion. Since 1994, South Africa has held free and fair elections and has a vibrant multiparty democracy, and South Africa has a robust civil society. Yet, by many measures, South Africa is a failing state. Unemployment is estimated to exceed 40%, particularly for youth.

[00:21:21.670] - Anthony Carroll, Johns Hopkins University, School of Advanced International Studies
Almost half of South Africa's households receive some form of welfare payment, and the country has among the worst distributions of wealth in the world. Labor is expensive and inflexible. Corruption and criminality are at frightening levels and involve international criminal networks from Nigeria, Russia and China, resulting in South Africa's being placed on the FAFT grade list. Infrastructure is collapsing at the national and local levels. The failure to deliver on critical public services has undermined confidence, resulting in low voter turnout in recent elections and a brain drain. Lastly, Xenophobia is rampant and often deadly. The US. Economic relationship with South Africa is mixed. No country has benefited from AGOA as much as South Africa. Last year, South Africa exported over $14 billion in goods to the US. And US. Exported 6.5 billion of goods and an increase of 15% from 2021, and another estimated 2 billion in services. Our imports from South Africa include manufactured goods and agricultural products that employ thousands of people and have fostered the emergence of regional value chains. Over 600 us. Companies operate in South Africa, and many do so as a gateway to Africa. Blue chip us. Companies such as Pfizer, J and J, Amazon Web Services, Stalantis, and Ford have all recently invested billions of dollars and South Africa plays an important role in our quest to secure critical minerals.

[00:22:42.240] - Anthony Carroll, Johns Hopkins University, School of Advanced International Studies
While our diplomatic relationship is founded in such areas intellectual property rights and the UN south Africa does provide fertile ground for U. S. Development assistance, most notably with PEPFAR. Additionally, myriad collaborations between U s. Institutions and South African counterparts exist. For example, Texas Children's Hospital is supporting the training of South African pediatric, oncologists and nurses at two leading South African hospitals. And at last, among all nations, South Africa US. Is the leading contributor to South African tourism. But our relations with South Africa have been colored by recent developments. South Africa's trade relationship with China has blossomed, and China is now its largest trading partner. However, there is much dissatisfaction on both sides of that relationship. China has not been able to assert its will over South Africa that has in other African countries. And there is much dissatisfaction in South Africa because that trade is largely the export of raw materials and the import of finished goods. Mainly, many South Africans fear that BRICS will become primarily a vehicle for Chinese commercial and political influence. South Africa's relationship with Russia is also perplexing. The recent joint military maneuvers with China and Russia underscore South Africa's ambivalence about reproaching Russia for its aggression.

[00:23:53.620] - Anthony Carroll, Johns Hopkins University, School of Advanced International Studies
The ANC's largest donor is a Russian oligarch. However, this closeness is not new. The ANC received decades of support from the Soviet Union in struggle against apartheid, and many aging leaders of the ANC were educated in the Eastern Bloc. Upon the installation of a democratic government, south Africa and then the Russian Federation entered into an agreement of cooperation. But Russia's economic influence in South Africa is minuscule in comparison to that of the US. And in recent polls, let's show that South Africans do not support Russia's aggression in Ukraine. In conclusion, while I share the concerns of many about the direction of our relations with South Africa, I would oppose making it ineligible for AGOA. First, I do not believe that its embrace of Russia constitute a direct threat to US. Security. Second, goods exported to the United States provide critical jobs to South Africa and provide lower priced goods for the US. Consumers. Third, South Africa's removal from Ago would only play into the hands of anti US. Elements within the ANC and the radical EFF party. Also, South Africa as a member of Saku removal would damage the economies of friends member states. Rather while ago, it needs to be extended in this Congress that does not preclude starting restarting negotiations with the South Africa Customs Union Free Trade Agreement as is now being negotiated with Kenya.

[00:25:06.910] - Anthony Carroll, Johns Hopkins University, School of Advanced International Studies
Also, South Africa has an economic partnership agreement with the US. With the EU that disadvantages us. Exports. We could make South Africa's continuation as a beneficiary subject to the grant of equivalent status. Third, I'm hopeful that Africa will conclude the Continental Free Trade Agreement that will allow us to enter in a continent wide trade agreement. Lastly, while not directly related to trade, I believe that the US. Can make three vital contributions to South Africa and Africa, the world's youngest continent. First, by transferring technology. Second, making creative capital available, and third, educating young African leaders in the US. Such as through the remarkable success of the Ali program. Thank you, sir.

[00:25:48.720] - Congressman John James
Thank you, Mr. Carol. I now recognize Ms. Tlhabi for her opening statement.

[00:25:56.420] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. The year 2024 is a seminal moment in South Africa. We, like the United States, are entering an election year. We are also marking 30 years since the first democratic election in 1994. And that moment is special, and I do want to spend time reflecting on it, because it was the first time that I saw my mother voting. She was the same age as I am. My grandparents, who are in their 70s, were voting for the first time, and my father died without ever voting in the land of his birth. This history is important. This election was emblematic of a rebirth. A new nation was emerging from the yoke of racism, exclusion and oppression, and could offer a model for a thriving democracy. The election was about restoring the dignity of black citizens, but also assuring our white counterparts that South Africa remains a home for them. That election was also about providing basic services and economic opportunities to the previously disadvantaged. So you've used the word inflection point, and it is true. Next year's election is an inflection point. We arrive at that election with the promises of 1994 remaining elusive and unfulfilled.

[00:27:14.260] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
The powder keg, though, that could undo our democratic edifice, unemployment and inequality. These must be taken seriously, as they have a direct impact on citizens'engagement and preference for and against democracy. The Human Sciences Research Council. South Africa's social attitude survey conducted annually shows us that South Africans are increasingly dissatisfied with democracy. If democracy is so good, why are so many South Africans increasingly dissatisfied? From 59% satisfied with democracy in 2004 to only 32% satisfied? Well, this research tells us that South Africans attach an instrumentalist value to democracy. It is a preferred form of governance, inas far as it delivers on the socioeconomic needs of many. They do not attach to democracy because of its intrinsic value of equality before the law. They do not see it as the best political method to advance human rights, dignity, freedom and equality. It is about basic services and the right to economic opportunities. These restore human dignity far more than anything else. I would like to suggest that there's a strong link between democracy on the ground and our foreign policy choices. South Africa's democracy must not be allowed to collapse, even as some of its foreign policy choices are found disappointing.

[00:28:58.060] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
A strong economy keeps rogue nations out. We have seen Russia's aggressive return and re engagement with the continent. And we must use the word return and re engagement because it suggests that there was a time when Russia left Africa, which is not a message that it preaches. It likes to create an impression that it was always on African soil. It wasn't. The Soviets did leave Africa, and that relationship itself was complicated. They are returning now. I do want to say that Africa is not monolithic. There is diversity and plurality. We see with Russia's engagement is that they have been most successful in weaker states, where democracy is precarious, where the regulatory environment is non existent, and where the returns are quick. I repeat this russia has been most successful in weaker nations where democracy is flimsy. Madagascar, Sudan, the Central African Republic. The list goes on. Africa is not only the stage on which Russia projects its power to the United States and its Western allies, but also a space for the exploitation of new commercial opportunities. Why does Russia succeed? Russia has presented this history as an ally of Africa, claiming to treat the continent as an equal partner in strengthening economies and crafting a multipolar world that can offer a geopolitical counterbalance in the world order.

[00:30:28.590] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
It uses normative justifications like anti imperialism and sovereignty to penetrate the continent. These messages find fertile ground in a continent that is breaking free from the shackles of colonialism, imperialism and racism. This message matters to Africans, and Russia recognizes that and exploits it. The United States, while being our strong ally and partner, does not quite enjoy the same affection. And it is not only because of the Soviets'ties to the ruling party in South Africa, but it is because the US. Is viewed as threatening and condescending. Some epistemic humility is required. As the US. Engages with its partners, africans value their hard earned autonomy, and any partner that adopts a paternalistic tone is viewed with disdain. The United States is viewed as a country that seldom reflects on its own contradictions and inconsistencies, and uses its economic and military might to ensure that others toe the line while adopting a different set of rules for itself. In Niger, there has been a coup. A coup is anti democratic, but the United States is vulnerable there from a security and an anti terrorism point of view, and you have had to engage with the coup leaders. It's not ideal, but we agree that a coup is unsavory and anti democratic.

[00:31:44.780] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
You work with what you have in foreign relations, and South Africa has a relationship with Russia. But we value the relationship with the United States. It is true that South Africa benefits richly from its relationship with the United States far more than it does from its relationship with Russia. South Africa also has far more in common with the United States than with Russia. A Free Press I can say whatever I want to say about South Africa, and nothing happens to me. A robust civil society that pushes back against state excesses, a free judiciary these are our common values, and perhaps they offer some pathway to salvage that relationship. But South Africa and other African countries don't want to appear weak, don't want to appear to be dancing to the tune of the United States. Western governments will need to take Africa into their confidence regarding geopolitical matters, rather than berate the sovereign stances of countries that feel unseen and undermine. The United States must demonstrate respect for historical wounds and the sovereignty that matters so greatly to its African counterparts. The historical ties with Russia are there, but now there's growing mistrust. The vaccine inequality caused some injury to African citizens.

[00:33:01.810] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
The lack of a permanent seat in the United Nations Security Council those things matters. It makes Africans feel that United States is our friend on its terms. The door doesn't quite open and open fully. We must not exaggerate Russia's influence on South Africa and other African nations. But it is worth reflecting on how the United States treats its partners. It is worth reflecting on what this non alignment, why it matters to African countries seek to understand rather than throwing a fit of peak. Russia's influence is limited by the extent to which it can influence the political elite of a country and spread its patronage network in South Africa. Russia has not succeeded in penetrating the state. There was aggressive pushback against the nuclear deal, which would have bankrupted our state. There is much affection for our history with the United States. There is an embrace of the vibrancy of the United States democracy, and there's much alignment. While South Africa's position on Russia's aggression was disappointing, I posit that away from the flashing cameras and slogans our democratic institutions have held. But they need to be supported. Furthermore, programs that bolster economic growth and democracy will go a long way in closing the door for any rogue players and ensuring that the South African state always acts within the dictates of liberal democracy and constitutionalism.

[00:34:28.560] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
Thank you, Chair.

[00:34:31.720] - Congressman Ronny Jackson
Mr.

[00:34:32.250] - Congressman John James
Ms. Tlhabi, your remarks were quite incredible, so I let you extend for about a three and a half minutes, because your words were very important. Thank you very much. But in the future, if we could attend to time, it would be very much appreciated. Well done.

[00:34:47.360] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
Thank you.

[00:34:47.970] - Congressman John James
The chairman now recognizes Mr. Maroleng for his opening statement.

[00:34:55.040] - Chris Maroleng, International Chief Executive Officer, Good Governance Africa
Chairman John James, ranking Member Sarah Jacobs, and distinguished members of the Subcommittee on Africa. Let me start by expressing my gratitude for the invitation to express views of my organization good governance, Africa, on this crucially important subject of bilateral relations between the United States and South Africa. We are indeed honored to appear before you today. With your permission, Chair, I'd like to summarize my written remarks and submit the rest to the subcommittee record. South Africa, as has been mentioned by many of those who have testified today, stands at a crossroad of profound significance. We have overcome colonialism apartheid. It now faces two critical new challenges. The first being finding its place in a world entering a new era of great power, competition and the post apartheid state's susceptibility to opportunistic governance and the mismanagement of our country's economy. While we take a moment to acknowledge South Africa's commendable strides since the dawn of democracy some 30 years ago, such as our robust democratic framework and unwavering judicial independence, we should be equally robust in acknowledging our shortcomings. Let us begin with a frank assessment of South Africa's domestic situation. The diminishing efficacy of the state, the escalating specter of crime, and the decline of health and educational standards are pressing concerns.

[00:36:39.530] - Chris Maroleng, International Chief Executive Officer, Good Governance Africa
The state has become a hub for political patronage and cronyism, leading to conflicts between and within big business and the private sector. The deterioration of South Africa's state owned enterprises, especially our nation's power supply ESCOM threatens political stability and social harmony. The governing elite's interests marked by corruption have resulted in mismanagement and financial instability. The ideological battles in the ANC over the state's role in the economy arise from resource conflicts, with the greatest challenge being the anti democratic politics that have been marked by attacks on key state institutions, which have broadly come to be described in South Africa as state capture. Its second great challenge, we would argue, comes from renewed emerging rivalries between major economies such as China, India, Russia and the United States. The rivalries will define how the world navigates some of the great challenges of our century, to name a few. These are conflict, technological disruption, climate change, mitigation, and poverty alleviation. South Africa remains an important partner to the great powers. It is the greatest individual trading partner that China, the EU, India, and the United States each have on the African continent. It also ranks among the top five African countries in terms of aggregate trade with Russia.

[00:38:22.040] - Chris Maroleng, International Chief Executive Officer, Good Governance Africa
Great powers are therefore seeking South Africa's support, especially over contentious issues. At the heart of the tension lies fundamental differences in foreign policy. The South African foreign policy, characterized by active non alignment, contrasts with the United States'assertive global posture, which is a reflection of its power on the global stage. These differences have been notably evident in key areas. The war in Ukraine has been a contentious issue. South Africa's reluctance to join in international condemnation over Russia's invasion of the Ukraine stands in sharp contrast to the United States stance against Russian aggression. Another flashpoint has been the Israeli Palestinian conflict. The two nations have adopted divergent approaches and perspectives towards the Middle East, deepening this seeming rift between them. Further complicating matters is South Africa's growing alignment with China, particularly as a member of BRICS. China's increasing economic and strategic influence in South Africa has raised concerns in the United States, which views China as a strategic competitor. A particularly contentious event was South Africa's decision to host naval exercises with Russia and China in February of 2023. The move was met with sharp criticism from the United States, which perceived it as undermining diplomatic efforts to isolate Russia.

[00:40:03.560] - Chris Maroleng, International Chief Executive Officer, Good Governance Africa
The deterioration in relationships between Washington and Pretoria has thrown into sharp relief. Or has been thrown into sharp relief when the United States ambassador, Ruben Brigady, alleged that South Africa had supplied arms to Russia in December 2022 using the Russian carrier Lady R, ambassador Brigady is yet to provide tangible evidence to validate these claims. This claim did appear on the face of it not being privy to the background sequence of events to have resulted in convincing Russia's president, Vladimir Putin, to forego in person attendance at the recent BRICS summit in Johannesburg. For many, these events have exposed a contradiction in South Africa's foreign policy. Many see strategic non alignment as incongruent with our constitutional aspirations of human dignity, the achievements of equality, and the advancement of human rights and freedom. In conclusion, let me state the following the implication of this strained relationship between the United States and South Africa are significant and extend beyond the diplomatic arena. Trade, investment and cooperation in a number of sectors have characterized the economic relationships between South Africa and the United States. South Africa serves as a gateway for many of the approximately 600 US. Businesses into our continent.

[00:41:37.540] - Chris Maroleng, International Chief Executive Officer, Good Governance Africa
Conversely, the US Represents a significant market and a source of foreign direct investment for South Africa. AGOA has boosted South African exports, especially in the automotive and agricultural sector. And both countries have shown an interest in collaboration in areas like technology, research and development. While any deterioration in the relationship could potentially harm South Africa's economy, both, and I repeat, both nations have a vested interest in ensuring stability, democracy and human rights in Africa. South Africa remains an enormous opportunity to the US. Chinese loans to Africa are really two decade low. We need more unconditional initiatives in South Africa, underpinned by the shared and common values that our countries have. Such an approach, based on mutually valued norms anchored on inclusive and effective governance will lead to more enhanced cooperation focusing on people to people relations. So, in conclusion, as my father used to say, sometimes it's not about the message, but it's about the messenger. In this regard, the Brigady incident has demonstrated that there is a need for the US. To maintain decorum in bilateral diplomatic relations. While South Africa must carefully manage its ties with China and Russia to ensure that it does not come at the expense of relationships with this important ally.

[00:43:12.810] - Chris Maroleng, International Chief Executive Officer, Good Governance Africa
Like yourselves. The US. Has an opportunity to reimagine the future with not just South Africa, but the continent as a whole. South Africa and the United States have a great deal to offer one another. Both societies place a strong emphasis on human rights, individual liberties, and protecting the rights of citizens. As our relationship continues to evolve, our shared values and commitment to multilateralism should become the bedrock of our collaboration and partnership on various global issues, all to the mutual benefit of our great country. Thank you very much.

[00:43:51.740] - Congressman John James
Thank you, Mr. Marling, I exercise a bit of discretion from the chair to grant a few minutes to those who may have traveled many hours to be here moving forward in the future. In the spirit of respect of everyone's time, I will be giving a light gavel at the 1 minute warning mark, and then I will be giving a hard gavel at the conclusion of five minutes. If there are remaining questions, we will circle back for another round. Thank you. I'll recognize myself for questions first. Ms. Talabi. Am I pronouncing your name correctly?

[00:44:28.910] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
Great. Thank you.

[00:44:29.790] - Congressman John James
Okay. Thank you.

[00:44:30.870] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
Great.

[00:44:31.160] - Congressman John James
Thank you, mr.

[00:44:31.950] - Anthony Carroll, Johns Hopkins University, School of Advanced International Studies
Lobby.

[00:44:32.420] - Congressman John James
South Africa has one of the world's most expensive social grant systems, the size of which is increasingly growing. In 2023, there are 18 million South Africans receiving state grants, compared with 2.5 million in 1999. For comparison, 16 million people in South Africa have a job and only 5.5 million pay income tax. This level of increased state dependency is worrying and implies decades long economic failings. In addition to the very poignant and I think, important points that you made around. If I can summarize the United States finger wagging foreign policy and how it is received and perceived amongst diverse groups of South Africans, can you give us a bit of insight onto what these statistics show about the ANC's ability to govern effectively and how the United States can more appropriately partner with South Africans to increase opportunity.

[00:45:35.500] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
It is absolutely true that the ANC government has failed, and it is being articulated through various forms of ongoing protests. The proliferation of more opposition parties, the strengthening of civil society. And the ANC government does indeed speak about the number of recipients of social grants as a sign of success. Yes, it is true that in a decent nation, you do make provisions for the most vulnerable members of society. I don't think that South Africa should be ashamed of providing Social Security for those who are indigent and desperate, because our conditions are really, really dire, especially for those who have not tasted the fruits of democracy. However, having more and more people reliant on the state is a sign of poor governance and the poor management of our economy. Poor people should not be caught in the crossfire of the ANC's poor governance. They need those social grants precisely because they are so desperate. And I want to support what Chris was saying, that it is possible for the United States to reframe a relationship with South Africa that comes with certain conditions, conditions that will empower the economy, fire up the economy, so that we have more and more people absorbed into the job market.

[00:47:00.110] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
So, in a nutshell, I'm saying a country does need to provide for its desperately poor. But the growing number in South Africa does indicate poor governance by the South African state, and it also shows that our economy has not been run properly. But I will tell you this, Mr. Chairman, that the United States must perhaps consider that our country is not just made of government decisions or of the government. It is made of citizens, civil society, people who remember the United States history with South Africa, which perhaps is not well exploited. I'm referring here to an incident that happened in 1986. In fact, on the 29 September, it's the anniversary of that incident where the House overwhelmingly voted 313 to 83 to override President Reagan's veto.

[00:47:53.660] - Congressman John James
In the time that we have in your response, I would like you to maybe give a little bit of insight on exactly how we can address the needs of the people without taking that paternalistic tone, that condescending contradiction that you mentioned before. How can we execute that from the United States Congress to actually affect the lives positively of South Africans?

[00:48:16.140] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
I think supporting South African businesses because the business community remains vibrant, it remains influential, the business community does often hold the government to account when it comes to our energy cris. I'm sure you are familiar with the fact that our country has been experiencing some load sheding or blackouts, as it were. It is the business community that has come to step up and rescue South Africa.

[00:48:39.700] - Congressman John James
And what level of accountability can we share with the American people that their tax dollars are being used efficiently and in their own best interest?

[00:48:47.000] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
I think when you start seeing the fruits of the investment into South African businesses, youth programs that the United States already has and runs with South Africa, those kind of interventions that make a real improvement in the lives of the people, but also when you see that South Africa's civil society and the voting choices, they're not rewarding the ANC. The ANC is the party in power. Of course, there are historical reasons for that, but when you look at its share of the vote, you can see that citizens are starting to talk back. They are starting to turn away from poor governance and corruption. So I think the United States has to have a vested interest in democracy by supporting entrepreneurship, investment opportunities, and giving education opportunities for many Africans who want to stay at home and build their country.

[00:49:34.270] - Congressman John James
Thank you very much. I'm going to practice what I preach and now recognize my ranking member, ms. Jacobs.

[00:49:39.110] - Congresswoman Sara Jacobs
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I first want to drill down a little bit more on just the perceptions of the United States in South Africa. We've talked a lot about the bilateral relationship and the history, but Mr. Moraleng and Ms. Tilebi, if you could add more color on what is the perception of the United States and today's Russia, both among the South African population and within the ANC, recognizing that neither of these are monoliths? And how do these perspectives range?

[00:50:15.480] - Chris Maroleng, International Chief Executive Officer, Good Governance Africa
Can I start?

[00:50:16.200] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
Sure.

[00:50:17.640] - Chris Maroleng, International Chief Executive Officer, Good Governance Africa
Thank you very much. Thank you very much for the question. I think, as you indicate, the perceptions are varied and are representative of the diversity of views in South Africa. However, generally speaking, you could say that within the ANC, the perception of the United States is shaped, as we have indicated in our submissions, by the histories, that is, the history of the anti colonial struggle and of course, the struggle against apartheid in South Africa. Historically, as was pointed out very well by Reedy, the ANC, the governing party in South Africa, has typically had close ties with the former Soviet Union. These have been extended to Russia. However, this closeness to the Soviet Union must not be interpreted as a generalized view of the population in South Africa. Indeed, it was pointed out by my colleague here that polls have demonstrated in South Africa that the views of the people are not necessarily aligned in the majority with those of the NC shaped by these histories. However, having said so, let me hasten to add that it's important that you also understand that the people of South Africa and the people of the United States share similar values, similar aspirations, which, in my humble opinion, should be the centerpiece of the thing that unites the United States and its people.

[00:51:57.260] - Chris Maroleng, International Chief Executive Officer, Good Governance Africa
And the people of South Africa. A focus on these similarities in values will allow this relationship to be enhanced and, in my view, allow the United States to shift away from a policy that is shaped by conditionality towards a policy that recognizes the sameness in the normative values of the United States and, of course, South Africa.

[00:52:23.520] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
I would add that it's so important to have perspective and not to overreact. The fact of the matter is that in opinion pieces, in analyzes, it is very clear that South African society pushes back against the ANC's gravitation towards any nation that is deemed to be autocratic that happens on the ground. And I think that's a point I was making earlier, that when you imagine South Africa, don't just think ANC, think about plurality, think about the rest of the citizens and other pillars of the state, that there different opinions and different contestation can be found. The ANC, even though it is the party in government, I would say that they don't always reflect what South Africans feel, and I think that the United States can find partners within South African society. But the point I also want to make is that there is this perception that the Soviet Union supported the fight against apartheid. Okay, we know about that history, but the history that doesn't get spoken about is that the US. Also supported the fight against apartheid. I mentioned an anniversary of that 1986 veto. The House and the Senate overwhelmingly supported the comprehensive Apartheid Act that put sanctions on South Africa.

[00:53:40.930] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
That history is important, and what has happened is that Russia perhaps has exploited its involvement and exaggerated to great benefit. It's the information wars capturing the narrative, and perhaps the United States have been a tad too humble about its support for the democratic process. So some know about this history, others reflect it in everyday commentary. But I do think that we don't have a voice from South Africa that just supports Russia without any condition. There's a pushback against that perception too.

[00:54:15.380] - Congresswoman Sara Jacobs
Thank you. Very helpful. I yield back.

[00:54:19.380] - Congressman John James
Thank you, ma'am. The chair now recognizes Rep. Kim for five minutes.

[00:54:24.500] - Congresswoman Young Kim
Thank you, chairman James and ranking member Jacobs, for holding this hearing today. And we are talking about very important relations with South Africa. So I want to thank all of our witnesses for coming and attending and answering our questions. The CCP's efforts to gain economic and strategic influence in South Africa have been less successful than elsewhere on the continent, largely because of the size of the South Africa economies and the strength of the South African institutions such as the Constitutional Court and independent media. I want to ask my first question to Ms. Talabi. How important are the judiciary and media, as well as other strong institutions in protecting South Africa from the toolkit China typically employs to gain influence in the African continent?

[00:55:19.080] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
Thank you very much for the question. And I do sound like a broken record now because it goes to the point that South Africa's society is vibrant. What the party in government does often gets challenged. Even in the Constitutional court. The Apex Court has ruled on the constitutionality of certain measures by the ruling party. They can't just get their way. We have a vibrant, parliamentary and constitutional democracy. So when I say that it is important for the United States to continue supporting South Africa, those are the kind of pillars that you can continue supporting. We have seen our judiciary being attacked by politicians who are in trouble with the law, and I think this country would have experience with that in recent years.

[00:56:01.860] - Congresswoman Young Kim
Can I ask you then, as a follow up, how effective are the same institutions in promoting South African population from the ineffective governance and rampant state capture orchestrated by African National Congress ruling class elites who are increasingly out of touch with the wishes of the people?

[00:56:23.580] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
The institution that you've mentioned for your question, the judiciary, how effective has it been? It was the judiciary that made a historic ruling on the right to housing, where the state was shown to have had resources to provide housing for poor people. We had the Krutbum case. I won't bore you with the history, but the Constitutional Court often comes in to compel the state to act in a particular way. We have examples of the state acting unconstitutionally, of Parliament acting unconstitutionally, challenging the authority of the public protector withholding important information from the media and from the public. Our courts have come in and they've shown themselves to be resilient and have been a bulwark of our democracy. There are many case studies, I will say, of when the courts have stepped know.

[00:57:19.130] - Congresswoman Young Kim
Oftentimes the US. Does not effectively broadcast the message of all the work it is doing, not only in South Africa, but across the continent, from trade to Pafar, the US. Has been an instrumental partner in the South Africa for over the years. So I want to ask this question to, you know, how can the United States better messages work in South Africa, especially considering the Russia and Chinese media influence? And maybe Ms. Tulip can talk, but I wanted to post this to you.

[00:57:51.900] - Anthony Carroll, Johns Hopkins University, School of Advanced International Studies
Mr. Carol, thank you very much. Firstly, the United States provides, as noted before, $750,000,000 a year to support the PEPFAR program in South Africa. That has certainly been a bulwark against the terrific horrors of infectious disease in South Africa. And it is greatly appreciated by clinicians, by patients, by the media. I think there's certainly room for us to perhaps even get more credit for it. We also perhaps taking a leaf from Russia's activities in the Sahel. We can do more in enhancing educational collaboration between the United States and young South Africans who themselves aren't necessarily wedded to the messages of the ANC. They want to learn, and I think we can give them opportunities. I've been involved with the Ali program since an inception, and I've seen the wonderful benefits that has provided.

[00:58:44.520] - Congresswoman Young Kim
Can I ask you to just walk us through the impact that Pepper has had in South Africa and across the continent? And also, how would South Africa, as well as other African countries, view United States if we let pepar expire, especially given Russia and PRC's growing influence in the region?

[00:59:05.640] - Anthony Carroll, Johns Hopkins University, School of Advanced International Studies
Yeah, I mean, there has been no public diplomacy program in my lifetime. And I'm a Peace Corps volunteer, and I take great credit for the experience that I had as a Peace Corps volunteer. But I've never seen anything with such an impact as PEPFAR. It strengthens the whole infrastructure of African health. It not only provides treatments to people who are on death store, but it also provides the infrastructure that African help and manage its disease, manage diseases, whether it be infectious diseases or chronic diseases. We're supporting human capacity. We're supporting laboratory development. We are really the linchpin, if you would, of African health. And I think the collaborations we see, like I mentioned with Texas Children's Hospital, these institutional arrangements, rutgers in New Jersey has a strong program in HIV. Many in California have done great work. I think these institutional collaborations are very important and they're very much appreciated by clinicians and patients alike.

[01:00:01.340] - Congressman John James
Thank you, Mr. Carroll, for your response. And thank you, Rep. Kim, for your time. The chair now recognizes Mr. Jackson for five minutes.

[01:00:14.580] - Congressman Ronny Jackson
Thank you very much, Mr. James. Thank you. I have several concerns. I want to first thank the outstanding leadership in South Africa. I remember in 1985, I was 19 years of age protesting the apartheid government in South Africa right here in Washington, DC. And I was arrested along with many others, and my family members father, sister's, mother because it was the last majority African people to be held to an undemocratic standard by a white minority. And the United States government supported that, and in return, the Russians had supported the South Africans. So there is a unique relationship that the South Africans have with Russia because they were an ally. And I would simply like to know from anyone on the panel, how can we single out our most vital democratic ally in Africa, whose position in the Russian Ukraine conflict is no different than some of our allies in India, in Saudi Arabia, and in China? Why are we singly focusing on South Africa's unique relationship, and, if you will, letting them mute their voice on their right to self determination? They are very respectful and they're very appreciative of the American Trade Agreement and the trade that we have.

[01:01:39.150] - Congressman Ronny Jackson
But they also have a complex history that I think we fail to recognize.

[01:01:49.140] - Chris Maroleng, International Chief Executive Officer, Good Governance Africa
Thank you very much, Mr. Jackson, for the question. I don't think it's about singling out. I think it's about acknowledging the fact that South Africa is enjoined by its constitution to represent certain values around sovereignty, human rights, respect for the rule of law, which the aggression that has been perpetuated in Ukraine violates. So, in essence, what we are saying here is, especially as we consider the relationship between the United States and South Africa, is basically to amplify and put at the forefront these shared and common values. These shared and common values are around inclusive governance, around democracy, around the rule of law, and ensuring that the equal sovereignty of both countries are respected. And I think the plea of the majority of South Africans is simply that it is not asking the United States to act in a patriarchal manner in pointing fingers, as was pointed out by my colleague earlier on. But it is simply saying to your South African counterparts, uphold the values that you are enjoined to respect and that you believe in.

[01:03:12.420] - Congressman Ronny Jackson
Let me add a similar question. There's no such thing as a perfect relationship amongst and between countries, not even the US. With its closest historical allies. Are we not better off having a constructive engagement relationship with South Africa to bridge the divide so that other countries, when we say no, hypothetically, the United States, they would say yes and have a trade advantage. I'm more concerned about building bridges as opposed to taking them down. I'm more interested in opening doors as opposed to closing. Would we be better served in the United States interest to trade more with South Africa? I've heard a lot of disparaging comments about the ANC, but there are 13 political parties. There have been six or seven parties to form since South Africa has become liberated. So it seems that the young country, infant country, if you will, just 30 years of age, is going through growing pains like any other country. So why is this such a singular issue on attacking South Africa's respectful emergence onto the world stage.

[01:04:23.640] - Chris Maroleng, International Chief Executive Officer, Good Governance Africa
In my view, with respect, it is not about attacking South Africa. As I indicated before, it's about holding us to uphold our constitutional values. The ANC is the party of Nelson Mandela, and Nelson Mandela himself would not have been non aligned in his condemnation of a violation of human rights and democracy. So it is incumbent that, yes, we enhance our trade relations. That's very important, and I agree with this. But also at the same time, I.

[01:05:00.510] - Congressman Ronny Jackson
Think the United States violated human rights.

[01:05:04.080] - Chris Maroleng, International Chief Executive Officer, Good Governance Africa
It is not violating human rights. I'm talking about the relationship between South Africa and the US. Within the context of the Ukraine. That's what I'm talking about. However, I wanted to say that one of the things that we must also consider is calling out the hypocrisy, as viewed by us in South Africa, of some of the foreign policy positions of the United States. On the one hand, you want to determine who we can trade with and who we can't trade with, but at the same time, the United States trades with the very same people. For example, like China, which is one of the largest investors into United States economy.

[01:05:40.500] - Congressman Ronny Jackson
Thank you. I yield back my time. Thank you, Chairman.

[01:05:42.620] - Congressman John James
The chairman now recognizes Representative Baird for five minutes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member. And the witnesses? I appreciate you being here today. I guess my question focuses on the United States and South Africa have a strong two way trade relationship as it pertains to agricultural products. Agriculture is my background. And so South Africa is the largest food producer in the African continent, the way I understand it, and South African farmers are world renowned in their expertise. So in 2022, South Africa exported $243,000,000 worth of citrus fruit to the United States. Similarly, in 2022, the US. Exported $67 million of meat to South Africa. I'm concerned about the impact the ANC's governance will have on South Africa's agriculture sector, both with its ability to continue to produce products for export to the US. And as well as trying to maintain its own demand for US. Products. So, Mr. Carroll, I guess I'm going to ask you, how would you say the expropriation bill and mismanagement of the transport and power sector, what effect will that have on South Africa's ability to produce agricultural products?

[01:07:07.650] - Anthony Carroll, Johns Hopkins University, School of Advanced International Studies
Thank you, Mr. Barrett, for that question. And certainly let me address the issue of infrastructure and trade. Infrastructure specifically. South Africa has among the least competitive ports in the world. Not only does it impact South Africa's ability to export products, it also impacts the neighboring country's ability because they primarily use South African ports. The rail infrastructure and the road infrastructure are visibly declining on a yearly basis. Road and rail backups have snarled trade and have made it very, very uncompetitive to transport commodities not only within Africa, but, of course, to the United states. Fortunately, the citrus industry has been very competitive and anticipated and was able to manage its value chains to such an extent that it is now the largest supplier of whole oranges outside into the United States, which is a real success and very much a product of AGOA. There are many challenges in South Africa in the agricultural sector, including climate change, which, as we've seen just recently in the Western Cape, with massive storms that have flooded many agricultural areas. And that means that this year's crops will probably be on the decline. So I do think that South Africa's investment in infrastructure to facilitate these value chains and be able to provide competitive products to market is going to be the best mode in which they can improve not only their export market, but also facilitate the import of commodities into South Africa from the United States.

[01:08:37.970] - Anthony Carroll, Johns Hopkins University, School of Advanced International Studies
But on the issue of land reform, perhaps I would turn it over to Ridi to talk a little bit about that. From a perspective of South Africa, and particularly on the expropriation of agricultural lands.

[01:08:48.530] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
The land issue is a very emotive and very polarizing one, which has a very sad and tragic history. The 1913 Native Land Act that dispossessed South Africans, black South Africans, forcibly removed them from their land, and they lost their livestock and their well being. So there is a history attached to the land question which I do think gets exploited every time we get to an election. It is very important, I think, to have some perspective. Our constitution has always enabled the ANC to achieve land redistribution, restitution and tenure. The ANC has not used the provisions of the constitution. However, it is also important to not create an impression of a rogue ANC that is about to expropriate land without compensation. That has not happened. If you go to South Africa today, you don't have a Zimbabwe situation of forced removals and so on. The ANC government, whatever its fault, has actually respected the rights of landowners. Many years ago, there was a willing buyer, willing seller, where redistribution and restitution could happen in a negotiated conversation with the landowners, who, of course, if we look historically black people would say those are not the legitimate landowners.

[01:10:14.650] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
But post 1994, there was no one upmanship or trying to force landowners of their land. It has not happened. Even now, when you look at what the ANC government is talking about, it is expropriation without compensation, where it can be justified. That's what it says. It's talking about abandoned land, abandoned buildings, underused land. So I'm just saying that the conversation gets heated in the build up to the election, and it is something that the EFF has brought on the table. But from the government's point of view, there has always been a negotiation on the land issue.

[01:10:51.290] - Congressman John James
Thank you, Mr. Baird. Thank you, Mr. Lobby. The chair now recognizes rep Sheriffalis McCormick for five minutes.

[01:10:58.910] - Congresswoman Sara Jacobs
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, thank you so much for your testimony here. I wanted to go back to what we were discussing when it came to our relationship. The major part of the administration has been trying to move our relationship, particularly with South Africa, forward. And we touched on some of the conditions. So I wanted to ask this question to anyone who would want to answer it. What are specifically some of the conditions that you would like to see South Africa abiding by, especially for its continued participation in AGOA?

[01:11:31.030] - Chris Maroleng, International Chief Executive Officer, Good Governance Africa
I think one of the key things that I hoped would have been sort of focused on or come out in my testimony is the fact that we are really advocating for a differentiated approach in the foreign policy towards South Africa by the United States, which is not underpinned by conditionality. Because the conditionality that we could be encouraged to focus on right now really reflects and highlights the past policies that the United States has had towards south. Africa. In this time of strategic competition, especially on the African continent, with South Africa in particular, the United States needs to adopt, in my view and humbly saying, a more nuanced approach to the relationship between our two countries. This relationship I want to just pause.

[01:12:30.500] - Congresswoman Sara Jacobs
You real quick because I do want to address my next question was actually going to talk about the administration's position. The administration's position recently when it comes to Africa, there has been a renewed policy and efforts towards building relationships with Africa where we're moving not just from giving Africa aid, but more of a dignified approach where it comes to trade, economic resiliency, partnerships. So the administration has laid out several initiatives, partnered with funding and even introducing the African diaspora in the United States, partnering with Africa. And so that has been our position. And I wanted to get to that right afterwards. But I thought because you clearly identified some of the tension points with the participation with Russia, that we could look at the conditionality and if we could specifically touch on that and then we could take a look at if these new policy stances we've been taking, are they actually being felt and are you feeling it? Because we can have the administration could put forth this policy. But are you seeing it actually on the continent? Is it actually being amplified or has right as it stands right now, is it just words on paper?

[01:13:36.540] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
So if you want to address that.

[01:13:38.060] - Chris Maroleng, International Chief Executive Officer, Good Governance Africa
You can yeah, very quickly. In actual fact, it goes to the recommendations that I had in my presentation, which advocate for the following thing. The US, in our view, should really focus on a bottom up approach. By this we mean direct more resources towards empowering civil society, citizens, key institutions that support democracy in South Africa. And this is because it is these parts of our society that have stood up as a ballwalk against state capture, corruption and other inequities that have happened in our country. The other aspect that I wanted to really emphasize here is that there's a need to strengthen private sector collaboration between the United States and South Africa, which will, in our view, foster greater economic growth, which benefits both parties. Finally, I also want to emphasize the following that maybe there's a need to transition from, as you indicated, this aid centric approach towards a trade engagement leveraging on opportunities that are presented by the African Continental Free Trade Agreement.

[01:14:46.920] - Congresswoman Sara Jacobs
Step in for 1 minute before the chairman starts to give us that light tap, because he's putting a lot of pressure on us today.

[01:14:52.380] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
But thank you.

[01:14:53.140] - Congresswoman Sara Jacobs
I agree with everything you're saying. And so that's why I wanted to pinpoint exact points where we can grow, because we have programs present, even where we have educational institutions. Howard University has a program in South Africa where we had many discussions with the students in South Africa directly trying to talk more about democracy and what they would like to see. So I want to know how can we expand on that relationship and also how can we deepen that relationship? So that's really the course of my questioning. I know you only have 30 seconds for anybody who wants to come in.

[01:15:24.770] - Anthony Carroll, Johns Hopkins University, School of Advanced International Studies
I'll take 12 seconds. I think one of the areas that we overlook in South Africa is that South Africa institutions that I mentioned in my testimony are very robust and very strong and we should look to partner particularly in the financial sector with South African institutions as we develop our ambitions or implement our ambitions on such things as the Development Finance Corporation.

[01:15:45.710] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
I think also let's just be mindful that there are a lot of politicians who say stupid things and when they do that, it creates the impression that this is the stance of South Africa. We have a minister who recently said something about the CIA funding nonprofit organization. That's a lot of nonsense, and it gets called out in South Africa. What I would urge you to do is look at the tangible results. You mentioned Pep. You mentioned USAID. When you go to the ground, when you go to the communities, those people are not listening to the politicians. So let's not frame that relationship, our relationship, as only being confined to what the politicians are saying on the ground. Communities are active, communities are entrepreneurial. Communities need the support. That's where the results will lie.

[01:16:32.750] - Congressman John James
Thank you so much.

[01:16:33.670] - Congresswoman Sara Jacobs
And thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, for giving us that 38 seconds.

[01:16:36.620] - Congressman John James
And thank you for your questioning discipline and thank our panelists for their brevity. The chair will now recognize Rep. Kean for five minutes.

[01:16:46.910] - Rep. Thomas Kean, Jr.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As has been established by this panel and a number of questions already by this committee, unfortunately, corruption and economic mismanagement by the ANC led government has crippled the country, and we now see closer engagement in relations between the ANC and. The Chinese Communist Party and Russian Federation. With the current war in Ukraine and great power competition with China, south Africa has drifted closer to the anti Western camp during this past year. South Africa, China and Russia held military exercises. In recent BRICS summit in Johannesburg, president Cyril Ramu Fosa announced that Iran would be joining the bloc. I will soon be introducing legislation which have enacted would require the administration to conduct a bilateral review of the US South Africa relationship. And I want to thank the witnesses for being here today. I'm going to start with you, Mr. Carroll, if I may. In addition to my membership in this subcommittee, I'm also the chairman of the Europe Subcommittee. And there seems to be a trend in South Africa is deeply concerning to me, as I explained in my opening commentary. What do you think about these actions of allowing US sanctioned Russian vessels to stop at ports, held military joint exercises with Russia and China, and abstaining on UN votes condemning Russia's aggression and legal aggression against Ukraine?

[01:18:22.020] - Rep. Thomas Kean, Jr.
What do these actions suggest about South Africa's broader foreign policy? And what actions might be appropriate to address Pretoria's drift towards Russia and China without alienating our partners in South Africa?

[01:18:35.470] - Anthony Carroll, Johns Hopkins University, School of Advanced International Studies
Well, I certainly do not condone and support your concerns about this drift, as you described it. I do think, as we've evidenced here today, among my fellow witnesses, there is a robust civil society structure in South Africa that itself is pushing back and is providing a platform for robust discussion and criticism, open criticism. I urge you to read the South African media. I do every day, and it's remarkably candid and open in terms of its criticisms of government. I think we need to work with and use the tools that we have to try to encourage and enable those robust debates within South African civil society so they themselves can guide the government in terms of where these policies are heading and perhaps correct them in a manner which I think are more consistent with our aspirations and our common objectives in developing a very holistic and fruitful relationship with South Africa. I do think that we can certainly send messages such as you suggest that I think may accelerate those concerns and those issues. But I really think it's the South Africans that really need to be in the fore of this debate, and that supporting and encouraging civil society and developing these type of relationships with our institutions, whether they be in media relationships, whether it be educational relationships.

[01:19:45.950] - Rep. Thomas Kean, Jr.
What, in your experience and your opinion would explain these actions by the ANC led government? Well, there's you on the need for engaged civil society. The question here is between those issues laid as well as their position towards the Ukraine invasion by Putin. How would you explain why the ANC led government is having the current positioning?

[01:20:11.650] - Anthony Carroll, Johns Hopkins University, School of Advanced International Studies
It is two principal factors. Firstly, Mr. Kane, the historic relationship that the ANC had with Russia and the Soviet Union during the apartheid struggle. And secondly, I think we ought to be candid here, there have been officials within the ANC power structure in these circles surrounding the ANC power structure that have commercial interests with Russia, whether we saw that in the nuclear relationship during the Zuma career and as was the Zuma era. But we've also noted that the largest benefactor to the ANC is a Russian oligarch. So there are commercial interests that are driving this issue, and I think they're also well known within South Africa, if I may add.

[01:20:52.240] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
All of that is true. But I want to go back to the theme of my presentation that perception matters. It informs how people respond. The United States is viewed largely as the state that makes foreign policy decisions that benefit itself when it wants to benefit. Whether we're talking about the war in Iraq. I know it's a long time ago, but it has influenced how the United States is viewed.

[01:21:19.490] - Rep. Thomas Kean, Jr.
Is that a gravel no all the time in the world.

[01:21:25.410] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
So the perception is that the United States does not mind working with antidemocratic regimes if it suits its foreign policy interests. And that explains also why countries like South Africa would also want their autonomy to have relations with whoever they want to have a relationship with, because the United States does the same when it wants to.

[01:21:49.630] - Rep. Thomas Kean, Jr.
Thank you.

[01:21:50.190] - Anthony Carroll, Johns Hopkins University, School of Advanced International Studies
I'll yield back.

[01:21:51.410] - Congressman John James
Thank you, Mr. Kane. The chair now recognizes Reb Kam Lagrdov for five minutes.

[01:21:56.220] - Congresswoman Sara Jacobs
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you again for the invitation to participate in today's hearing. I have three questions. We have five minutes. We are going to do this, people, it's been concerning to see the United States South Africa bilateral relationship come under significant strain over the past year. And a few key insights. First AGOA benefits us. Foreign direct investment and the strong trading relationship between the United States and South Africa were a major counterweight to the government's interest in orienting towards Russia. Second, there's a divergence between the government's ties with Russia and the affinity of the South African people and their civil society who share with the US. Values of human rights, freedom of expression, and accountable governance. So, Mr. Carol, if we were to amend AGOA in the Reauthorization, what enhancements do you believe would increase its utilization of the program? And what might be the effect of including a digital trade component that reduces barriers to online commerce on the continent?

[01:23:02.390] - Anthony Carroll, Johns Hopkins University, School of Advanced International Studies
Well, let me return to my earlier statement that I believe that the US. Should engage, starting now, in the development of a bilateral trade relationship with South Africa and its neighboring Saku countries for a variety of reasons. First of all, that's a permanent relationship, one that doesn't have to be renewed. And moreover, it would provide more incentives for the US. To invest in South Africa. So I do think that we should embark upon as we're doing right now with Kenya in the development of a more durable permanent trade relationships in terms of a bilateral one. And that would also benefit US. Exports, which right now suffer from a disadvantage, versus European exports, which enjoy about a 15% margin. The other area that I think South Africa could benefit from is in encouraging and partnering with South African institutions in the development of their value chains and their infrastructure roads, rails, ports, what have you. I think this is an area where the USDFC can partner with not only South African institutions, but such institutions of the African Development Bank to be able to foster making South Africa more competitive in its exports sector. On the digital space, I think there's been a lot of controversy.

[01:24:09.680] - Anthony Carroll, Johns Hopkins University, School of Advanced International Studies
There's a lot of fears and protectionism in South Africa that's inherent in those discussions. I think we just continue to need to put pressure on saying the benefits of having open access and digital trade. I think right now they're not well understood in South Africa. And I think there's a protectionist element there fear element that I think needs to be overcome, and I think it can be overcome with persistence and more education on those issues.

[01:24:33.030] - Congresswoman Sara Jacobs
Thank you. So one area that is ripe for greater engagement is South Africa's blossoming creative industries, which employ nearly 7% of the national workforce and are supported by foreign investment. So, Ms. Tabi, can you share how you think deepening US engagement and support for South Africa's homegrown film and television industry could help strengthen the bilateral relationship?

[01:24:58.410] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
That is an area that I'm very passionate about, because it's an area that offers us an opportunity to share universal values and beliefs, whether it is of democracy, of human rights. South African artists are very political, and by that I don't mean they are aligned with this party or that party. They care about society. They produce output that constantly shifts the needle. In fact, I've seen commentary on social media where people make a joke that our weakest link is the state, because we've got these globally talented citizens who go anywhere in the world, and they make a mark. And that is why I was saying, in reviewing your relationship with South Africa, remember those people, they have contributed to the global market of ideas. They are entrepreneurial, they are innovative. Every single day in South Africa, we see their output and their occupation of the global stage. So I would say that an investment into those creative industries will unleash the potential of South Africa. It will create jobs. It will absorb even more of the township youth into the labor market. There are so many people who can't afford a university degree, and I think we are still backward in a lot of ways, Tony, in seeing social mobility as being dependent on a university degree, which is important.

[01:26:24.180] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
I wouldn't be here today if I didn't have an education. But we have a plurality and a diversity in South Africa that you must care about. It deepens democracy. It gives young people a sense of agency, and it creates a global village of ideas. So don't give up on us in that regard.

[01:26:43.610] - Congresswoman Sara Jacobs
Well, you all must work on your time management. So I'm going to adhere to the constraints of the chair, and I will yield back the balance of my time.

[01:26:52.140] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
Sorry.

[01:26:54.190] - Congressman John James
Thank you. Thank you very much. The chair now recognizes Rep. Mills, and I will say we will come around for a second round of questions because this is very intriguing, and I want everybody to be able to set their say. Rep Mills.

[01:27:06.930] - Rep. Cory Mills
Thank you, Mr.

[01:27:07.650] - Anthony Carroll, Johns Hopkins University, School of Advanced International Studies
Chair.

[01:27:07.960] - Rep. Cory Mills
Thank you. Ranking Member appreciate the guests as well. Before I get started, I want to request unanimous consent to enter into record a document which I had sent over to the honorable Molly Fee, the assistant secretary for the bureau of African Affairs at the State Department, addressing the administrative priorities for fiscal year 24 that I sent June 16 that I've never actually gotten a response back.

[01:27:31.960] - Congressman John James
So order.

[01:27:35.450] - Rep. Cory Mills
I heard a lot of things that was said today that I actually agree with. Perception in many countries, and I've spent a large portion of my life overseas. I spent over seven years in Iraq and three years in Afghanistan, in Kosovo, in Pakistan, Somalia, lived in Kenya for a while. Perception is reality in many of these areas. And I look at one of the things that you talked about with regards to how people viewed Iraq. And I recall in the 2005 Iraq constitution, that was this idea of an amalgamation of a British and US based constitution that kind of had a parliamentary structure. They had Article 76, which actually established sectarian democracy, which has destroyed that country. Today, we know that sectarian democracy did not work in South Africa, and it did not work in pre apartheid, and it did not work in Northern Ireland. And so I definitely see where the mistakes that were made by the US from a foreign policy perspective has impacted things, which actually probably drove South Africa more towards BRICS, because America, like many Western nations, have an inability to ask a country what they want as opposed to telling them what they need.

[01:28:39.870] - Rep. Cory Mills
I think this is a huge thing that needs to be corrected, and I think that's one of the areas that we all need to be addressing in that light. I want to talk about that letter I just give to the chairman. The Biden administration has contributed $1 billion towards the Just Energy Transition Partnership, which plans to transition the South African power grid towards clean energy solutions by paying owners to close their coal plants earlier than they otherwise would. Today coal firepowered plants actually provide over 80% of South Africa's electricity. And with the current energy cris plaguing the country, it is nonsensical for the funding to ignore the current realities in favor of an aspirational long term goal of the US and other Western countries. So my question how do South Africans view projects like these that prioritize the climate change talking points of a select few Western countries over the energy crisis which is facing them at the here and now?

[01:29:37.570] - Chris Maroleng, International Chief Executive Officer, Good Governance Africa
Thank you very much for that question. I think it's very important points that you raised as a preface to the question, and I agree with most of the points that you raised. It's exactly that that what is sort of characteristic of this foreign policy approach that we've seen by the United States is the fact that it lacks this element of seeming awareness of issues relating to social justice. We all aware of the needs that climate change and, of course, adjust transition requires. However, having said so, the burden is seemingly placed on countries that didn't cause the climate challenge, but at the same time are required to sacrifice the most in ensuring this just transition. I agree with you that maybe it's not necessarily that we should not go towards the implementation of projects that seek to bring about renewable energy and aspects of the just transition. What is important is that it should not be at the sacrifice of the people in the ground. And our point here today was as follows that the United States, in its policy towards South Africa, and of course, the rest of Africa, must be aware of the perceptions that are raised by a failure of addressing these.

[01:30:59.410] - Chris Maroleng, International Chief Executive Officer, Good Governance Africa
Issues of just transition and seemingly implementing a foreign policy that is not just aligned with the needs of politicians, but certainly with the aspirations and the needs of the people of South Africa.

[01:31:14.290] - Anthony Carroll, Johns Hopkins University, School of Advanced International Studies
Thank you, Mr. Mills, for the question. And let me be very brief. South Africa has about 7000 installed power. About 2600 of it are being actively used. I think where we can make big investments in inroads is how we can improve the efficiency of the existing system. I share your concerns about propelling an agenda upon South Africa that fits our interest and needs, but doesn't meet their needs in a society that is already constrained by many anti competitive elements. But I do think we can help South Africa improve the power structure that it does have.

[01:31:49.000] - Rep. Cory Mills
Well, I do agree with that. And I guess my biggest thing is when I think of foreign policy, yes, clearly, as an elected representative of the United States, I look at how it benefits us from a trade and partnership or bilateral trilateral agreement. But I also think about the host nation and how we build long term and long standing relationships. And I think that's something that has been neglected for far too long. With that, I yield back.

[01:32:10.230] - Congressman John James
Thank you, Mr. Mills, for your excellent questioning and time discipline. The Chairman now recognizes Ranking Member Jacobs for five minutes.

[01:32:18.710] - Congresswoman Sara Jacobs
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So I want to turn the discussion to South Africa's role as a leader in the Global South, including in articulating a vision for a multipolar world and where Global South countries have a larger role in the global governance system. I'm also very supportive of this, as is the Biden administration, who recently supported the AU's accession in the G 20. But I was hoping you all could share how you view South Africa's leadership role in articulating the views of the Global South and how does this role they're trying to play into the US South Africa bilateral relationship.

[01:32:57.170] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
I will speak to that for two minutes or less. 1 minute. 1 minute, you said chair. I think that countries that identify as marginalized and unheard will necessarily gravitate towards each other. And the conversation around creating a multipolar world is not about strengthening Russia or China or India. It is about not having one country that is more powerful than the rest. We know the history. We have had bipolarity, unipolarity at the fall of the Soviet Union and so on. So I do think that South Africa is actively seeking a global architecture where everybody's voice can be heard. And that is the reason you have found the BRICS members coming together. And I understand that there are others who are applying to expand, and it's about to get complicated. I don't know how far that will go. But there is in the Global South a recognition that we cannot have a world of superpowers anymore. Where there is the United States and everybody else, where there is Russia and everybody else, there isn't a choice between Russia or America. It is about creating a world where everybody has agency, where everybody belongs. South Africa is regarded as a powerful economy on the African continent.

[01:34:22.440] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
We've held several leadership positions on the African Union, and so the march towards a multipolar world is about positioning the Global South so that it's not always functioning at the expense of the global north.

[01:34:39.410] - Anthony Carroll, Johns Hopkins University, School of Advanced International Studies
South African B is certainly stepping forward and providing leadership in this evolution of, shall we say, a new dialog between the west and the Global South, as you point out. And I think South Africa can provide continued leadership, as it's doing right now, as the Africa Continental Free Trade Agreement is being led by a South African lawyer, a very able one, who I think is starting to show some merits in terms of getting South Africa to be more coherent as a trading regime. But I think there's a sense here that my COPANEL is claudia Reedy said that there's a perception that Africa has been left aside for a long time. It's the fastest growing continent. It will be a population center by 2030. Nigeria will be the third most populous country in the world. I think that there a sense that they needed to be at the table, and I think our foreign policy has to be more nimble in being able to adapt to these new realities.

[01:35:36.870] - Chris Maroleng, International Chief Executive Officer, Good Governance Africa
Thank you very much. I agree with what has been said earlier on by my two colleagues. However, one thing that I want to add is that it's not just at the foreign policy level where the United States can create the kind of change that we want to see. When I say we, I'm talking about US in the global south and South Africa, it is at the international governance level. The United Nations, it is currently inequitable with a few countries able to have a veto, while the majority of countries, most of them being in the global south, not having the ability to have their views affirmed and expressed. So the United States, in supporting the reform of the Security Council and also the reform of the United Nations and other multilateral forums internationally, can go a long way in shaping a foreign policy that presents the United States as a partner for development, a partner for change, and progress globally.

[01:36:37.780] - Congresswoman Sara Jacobs
Thank you. And really quickly, on anti corruption efforts, how can the US. Do it in a way that it actually breaks through, but doesn't seem like we are finger wagging?

[01:36:46.560] - Chris Maroleng, International Chief Executive Officer, Good Governance Africa
Mr. Moralling yeah, I would basically say it will be done by supporting key institutions that support and uphold good governance, especially in South Africa. These institutions are numerous. However, they have suffered in the past years in South Africa during a period that was described as state capture by attempts to also capture them, undermine the authority, and ensure that their effectiveness is reduced. So I would say one of the key things that the US. Can do is to support these key institutions that support democracy and good governance.

[01:37:23.860] - Congresswoman Sara Jacobs
Thank you.

[01:37:25.690] - Congressman John James
Thank you very much. Call a little bit of an audible. The chair will now recognize Mr. Jackson, if you have any additional questions, my friend.

[01:37:35.630] - Congressman Ronny Jackson
Thank you. Chairman James, I'm very much interested in following up on your question. How can we expand and increase our role in trade with South Africa? South Africa has been stated as the shining light for the African continent. That with competing interest from China, India, Russia, seems like it's at a crossroad and intersection for everything that we want to do in Africa. And I'm concerned that if we don't step up, that there'll be a vacancy and other people will find an opportunity. And you've had tremendous challenges going forward. I'm very familiar with the region from Zambia and Zimbabwe. The population has come down from Botswana and Namibia and Angola. It just wasn't that long ago that what was a Cold War in Europe made a hot war in Africa. And now the hot war in Europe is making Cold War tensions in the African continent. How can we expand and improve and show our further friendship for the enormous challenges that you've had? You've had populations and migration crisis like we have in the United States to enter your borders while you're trying to satisfy your citizens, people from neighboring countries that did not have water, did not have electricity, did not have housing, came to your borders.

[01:38:57.370] - Congressman Ronny Jackson
Yet you never made a crisis out of it. You simply opened your doors, kept the borders open. You let people come in. What can we do more to assist and help with your enormous challenges that you've confronted in a very short period of time?

[01:39:12.250] - Anthony Carroll, Johns Hopkins University, School of Advanced International Studies
Well, on the trade front, south Africa, as we've stated here, is going to have to make itself a lot more competitive. And one of the areas that it can make itself more competitive is by improving its infrastructure. And you know what? It's not going to be done by the government. It's going to have to be done with private sector initiative and private sector capital. The US. Has tools of private sector capital that can be brought in and perhaps mitigated with US. Government assistance, such as the Development Finance Corporation, us. Export Import Bank. And we can help South Africa partner with South African institutions and investors to try to improve efficiency of South Africa. Also, I think there's a lot more that we can be done in technology transfer, whether it be in the development of agricultural technology exchanges, whether it be in the new areas of information technology where the US. Has special advantages. Yesterday, I was with the chairman and CEO of MTN Bank, MTN telecom system, the largest in Africa, and they use about 95% of their important circuitry and intelligence of their system is not made up of Chinese technology, but it's made up of US.

[01:40:19.910] - Anthony Carroll, Johns Hopkins University, School of Advanced International Studies
And European technology. So we can continue to be a player in technology transfer, and we can continue to be a partner in developing capital that will help make South Africa more competitive.

[01:40:31.830] - Congressman Ronny Jackson
Thank you.

[01:40:35.750] - Congressman John James
Does the gentleman yield? Does the gentleman.

[01:40:39.520] - Congressman Ronny Jackson
I yield. Mr. James. Thank you very much.

[01:40:41.770] - Congressman John James
No problem. Thank you. Mr. Carol, I'm going to jump in and piggyback on that great question from my colleague, Mr. Jackson. I like your line that you're going here with business and private sector engagement investment. And it's estimated that South Africa of about 250 days of power blackout in 2023 or have had will have had excuse me. The primary domestic priority for South African government should be, I believe, the betterment of the lives of its people and ending the national state of emergency over the energy crisis and ensuring an increasingly reliable power supply for the South African people. And piggybacking on your comments. Can you give us a little bit more insight and clarity on the impact of South Africa's energy cris on the private sector to attract some of that investment and specifically that tech transfer, how it may be impaired and how much of a business disincentive this may be, or even a potential for capital flight of money that's already there.

[01:41:50.270] - Anthony Carroll, Johns Hopkins University, School of Advanced International Studies
I mean, I think you can ask any manufacturer who's already struggling with labor challenges in South Africa, which is labor is expensive relative to other economies in its category. It's also inflexible if you add on top of that the inability of being able to get power, any manufacturing venture is going to be really challenged. So I think South Africa, which really needs to grow its manufacturing and its agricultural processing sectors are very much hampered by the power supply problem. I do think that there are ways in which we can invest and co invest with South African institutions to improve the power, whether it be transmission, distribution, or improving existing production and creating new production can certainly be facilitators in being able to reduce those costs and increase reliability. But I think the partnership can be a two way partnership. I think it's clear to say that South Africa was at the fore of developing what was called the pebble bed nuclear power, which are the small modular reactors that South Africa was really at the fore of and developing a generation ago, have now come back in vogue. And the opportunities of being able to partner with some of the technology that was developed in South Africa for the creation of small modular reactors could also be a great way of being able to have a country such as South Africa leapfrog into a new technology platform for the creation of power.

[01:43:12.970] - Anthony Carroll, Johns Hopkins University, School of Advanced International Studies
We have many myriad institutions in the United States that can help facilitate that process, whether it be engineering institutions such as University of Michigan, which has world class engineering and power engineering that can partner with South African universities and companies to be able to develop some of those technologies.

[01:43:33.080] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
Just to add on that, I can't speak in granular details about those particular issues. But what I can tell the Chair is that we are reading reports in South Africa that as a result of the government's lethargic response to the energy crisis, citizens and the private sector have had to rely on themselves. It emphasizes the point that I was saying that let's not look at South Africa as just being its government. The private sector has been self reliant. Ordinary citizens have been self reliant in pursuing other alternative energy means. You can't, of course, ignore the state. You want the state to be there. But what I'm saying is that there is potential on the ground. There are people in South Africa who want to find solutions, and those are the people with whom the United States can work. And I don't have the figures as well, but it is a fact that more supply has been added on the grid and the government is taking credit for it. Okay, that's fine. But the fact of the matter is that the private sector and citizens have found other alternative means that opens the door for these investments that Mr.

[01:44:39.890] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
Carroll has been talking about.

[01:44:46.230] - Congressman John James
Thank you for those responses. With that, I yield. The Chair now recognize Rep. Kamlager Dove if she has five more minutes of questions.

[01:44:54.650] - Congresswoman Sara Jacobs
Thank you. Mr. Chair. This question is for Mr. Maroling. Russia has poured significant resources into shaping the information environment and spreading disinformation in Africa, including setting up a Russia today English language Africa hub in Johannesburg. So what are the narratives that Russia uses to heighten grievances against the United States and to positively frame its own engagement on the continent? And then how can we help South African media and civil society in promoting an independent information environment?

[01:45:37.350] - Chris Maroleng, International Chief Executive Officer, Good Governance Africa
Thank you very much. Thank you very much for that question. Well, one of the things that we've also seen is really Russia positioning itself in terms of strategy to the extreme left of the United States by presenting and raising histories of the liberation struggle. It effectively points out that it was the Soviet Union at the time that supported many of our liberation movements, including the Chinese, especially in southern Africa. This approach basically tries to present a view that presents Russia and China as pro the people of our region. The interesting issue about this thing about this situation is that we believe, as policy analysts is the following that the United States can simply pivot in an opposite direction by doing what we have been advocating here, highlighting and presenting the similarity and shared values that the people have on the ground. And this can be done not necessarily through government to government engagement, but it is by presenting these views and using institutions within civil society, the media in particular, who are very progressive in South Africa and have their finger on the pulse of what the sentiment is of the people. So my view is that a strategic engagement by South Africa, by the United States, that focuses on empowering civil society, NGOs, and other parts of South African society, to present these messages in a more palatable way to society in South Africa.

[01:47:27.690] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
I'd like to add to that, because I'm a journalist, I work in this field. It's quite exhausting, to be honest. This approach to the Soviet Union's presence in Africa as having resulted in this positive outcome for all African nations. It's complicated. The presence of Russia in Africa during the Cold War had mixed bags. There were some countries that benefited more than others. There were military and economic costs. And when the Soviets left, there was a leadership vacuum, and they also left because of a realist approach of self interest that is historically correct. I cannot suggest that the US. Government must be funding African media, because that is unethical from a journalism point of view. We don't want government funded media houses. However, I do stress the importance of other institutions, businesses in the US or NPOs, NGOs having an interest in democracy. You don't want to respond to Russia's information war with participating in it or creating a new one. We need independent media, and perhaps we can use democracy as the center, supporting democracy through supporting credible information. And I don't think that it's the US government that should go. In and be funding media houses.

[01:48:45.400] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
That is the exact opposite of what should be done, and it creates a similarity between that approach and Russia's approach. I can tell you right now, I'm very proud of a lot of our media in South Africa. Investigative journalism in South Africa has brought the country from the brink of the abyss. It exposed corruption. There are a lot of weaknesses. There are a lot of challenges in our newsrooms. But the media has been steadfast, and it has a history of taking on the state. That's something that investors and people who have an interest in democracy need to be mindful of. We've got to invest in the media, in information, in training the storytellers, but always with a focus on democracy.

[01:49:30.450] - Anthony Carroll, Johns Hopkins University, School of Advanced International Studies
And as I said earlier, Africa is the world's youngest continent. We should engage youth. We should engage them in programs such as the Ali program, which will mean that we have to play a long game. But I think that the exposure that we give youth in Africa to our norms and our standards in our society, I think will go far if we invest in that and willing to take a long term view.

[01:49:55.340] - Congresswoman Sara Jacobs
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.

[01:49:57.770] - Congressman John James
Perfect timing. I am going to once again thank our panelists and also the members who were here and attending. I have one final question. Can each of our guests here state how important PEPFAR is to African nations, but specifically to South Africa? And what would happen to the United States standing if this important program were to be jeopardized?

[01:50:29.890] - Anthony Carroll, Johns Hopkins University, School of Advanced International Studies
I spent a lot of time in this space and was involved in the original drafting of PEPFAR and have worked in a variety of capacities since its passage. PEPFAR is, as I said, the most important public diplomacy program that I've seen in my lifetime. We've saved 25 million lives. We have 5 million people under treatment. We've made terrific strides in managing and developing mechanisms and institutions to combat not only infectious diseases such as HIV, but the whole spectrum of disease. A country that I lived in, Botswana, is now the highest achieving country in the world in terms of having people on, being tested and on medication. I think that we have made a lot of successes here. I think our withdrawal from PEPFAR, particularly in a sudden way, would, I think, be a huge step back for the United States and its image in Africa and in South Africa, where $750,000,000 a year is spent and we are the backbone of infectious disease management in South Africa.

[01:51:29.190] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
If I may add there, I like to bring historical context as well. Again, South African civil society and the medical fraternity fought very, very hard to make the state's response to the devastating impact of HIV, to challenge it, to ensure that people are on treatment, to ensure that people have information. There was a dark period in South Africa, and I know that Pepa also involves other African countries. But if we can use South Africa as a microcosm that there were losses by families, civil society, religious organizations, the medical fraternity, the media, NGOs fought, the reason we have access to ARVs is because of those efforts, and ultimately, the state had to yield the power lay with the people. And so I see Pepfa as a manifestation of that battle. And if it were to be withdrawn, it would erase all those advances that were made at great cost. We know that on the African continent, pepa is appreciated as a mechanism to reduce HIV in Africa. And years later, you have something to go back on and see the positive impact. Pepfa cannot be compromised because of geopolitical tensions or because of whatever differences that states have amongst themselves.

[01:52:53.780] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
It is a great program. It has saved lives. It has made sure that there is a universality in our responses. Scientists from Africa are working with scientists from the United States. That is something very, very positive to educate nations and to change lives. It matters and should not be compromised.

[01:53:14.250] - Chris Maroleng, International Chief Executive Officer, Good Governance Africa
I can only agree with my colleagues. PEPFAR is an important tool that enhances and demonstrates the ability of the United States to change the living conditions and the lives in a positive way of the people of our continent. It is initiatives like this, Chair, that we believe the United States should not just enhance their involvement in, but certainly broaden. And this is in terms of finding other areas. For example, the circular economy, ensuring that citizens are empowered to hold their governments to account, to ensure that processes are developed in South Africa that really develop joint policies between the United States and South Africa that are aimed at the citizen, aimed at ensuring that the people on the ground in South Africa are the ultimate beneficiaries of the goodwill that is provided by the United States. So Pepfa is one such initiative that has proved the caring nature and the generosity of the people of the United States.

[01:54:20.910] - Congressman John James
What should we say to entities who would prioritize their political ideologies over the benefit of Pepvar?

[01:54:33.990] - Chris Maroleng, International Chief Executive Officer, Good Governance Africa
It is not about political ideologies, Chair. It is really about ensuring that the relationship between South Africa and the United States is put in its proper context. And I believe our shared values, our common norms, are the things that will underpin and uphold this relationship. Ideology, as has been said by many people in South Africa, does not put food on the table. It is the ability of developing policies that create jobs, enhance the livelihoods of the people of South Africa, are the kind of things that our citizens on the continent are looking for.

[01:55:13.790] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
If I may, Pepfa is not just about South Africa. There are other African countries, and we need to be mindful of them as well. I'm also reminded of how Pepfa was utilized in the 2014 Ebola outbreak. So this conversation is much bigger than South Africa and whatever ideology some politicians may talk about. And I also want to say that political leadership changes. This country more than any other knows that political leaders change. We have elections next year. We don't know what the outcome will be a couple of years down the line. We don't know what the outcome will be. But can we agree around certain values that should never change, regardless of who is in power? And I think saving lives and empowering young people should not be hostage to political and ideological permutations.

[01:56:06.150] - Congressman John James
I think that's the perfect way to conclude. I'd like to thank the witnesses for their valuable testimony and the members for their questions. The members of the committee may have some additional questions for the witnesses, and we'll ask you to respond to these in writing. Pursuant to the committee rules, all members may have five days to submit statements, questions and extraneous materials for the record, subject to the length of limitations. Without objection. The committee stands adjourned.

[01:56:31.430] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
Nice to meet I'm exhausted. I need a drink.

[01:56:37.510] - Anthony Carroll, Johns Hopkins University, School of Advanced International Studies
Thanks for doing this.

[01:56:39.830] - Redi Tlhabi, Journalist, Broadcaster and Moderator
What did you do to me?

[01:56:44.710] - Congressman John James
Good job, July.

[01:56:47.640] - Anthony Carroll, Johns Hopkins University, School of Advanced International Studies
Congratulations.

[01:56:48.600] - Chris Maroleng, International Chief Executive Officer, Good Governance Africa
Thank you, sir. Very good meeting you. I hope we stay in touch. I've got your car. Thank you so much.



